GBA: IGNpocket's Game Boy Advance FAQ

All the questions you have on Nintendo's next handheld are right here. 

Only a couple months to go and the Game Boy Advance will no longer be 
shrouded in mystery. We've been running this Game Boy Advance FAQ 
since the day Nintendo announced the successor to the Game Boy Color 
back in August 1999, and more information has flowed our way since 
then. We've seen the system, or rather, the development kit, so 
everything in this FAQ has been confirmed by us, but not officially 
by Nintendo. 

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Will there be a handheld system from Nintendo better than the Game 
Boy Color?

Naturally. Nintendo is constantly developing new hardware, in hopes 
that something will succeed its current product. In the case of the 
handheld market, technology has advanced and cheapened enough that 
the company can finally release a more powerful, color portable at 
an affordable, compatible price tag. 


What will this system be called?

The current in-house name is the Game Boy Advance. It's known in 
development circles as AGB, just as the Game Boy Color is known as 
CGB and the black-and-white Game Boy is known as DMG (for Dot Matrix 
Game). Will this be the final name? It's hard to tell but the name has 
certainly caught on in the industry. We'll know in two months.


When was the system announced to the public?

Word leaked out about the Game Boy Advance at the Nintendo Space 
World in late August, but no specifics were offered.


The first announcement on the Game Boy Advance was offered by 
Nintendo Co. LTD on September 1, 1999. Sources believe it was 
announced this early because of the public announcement of Mobile 21, 
a Nintendo/Konami company collaboration that will develop 
communication tools and games for the Game Boy Advance and Nintendo 
Dolphin system.


When is the system going to come out?

Right now there isn't a set date, just a vague one. It'll be released 
first in Japan by the end of 2000. the US market's current release 
date is First Quarter 2001.


When will we first see the Game Boy Advance in action?

The first public unveiling of the Game Boy Advance will be at Space 
World 2000, a Nintendo event in Tokyo Japan this August 24-26, 2000.


What is the system going to look like?

The Game Boy Advance will be a drastic turn in Game Boy system design. 
Where the original Game Boy, Game Boy Pocket, and Game Boy Color were 
vertically-aligned systems, the Game Boy Advance will change the way 
you hold the Game Boy system a horizontal design much like the Atari 
Lynx, Game Gear, and NeoGeo Pocket Color. Nintendo hasn't released 
any photos of the system design, holding onto those details until 
Space World 2000.


I've seen pictures of the Game Boy Advance. Where did you get those?

We have no idea what the system will look like other than the screen 
and system size and amount of buttons. 


Okay, so what are these specifications?

Here they are as supplied by Nintendo:

Game Boy Advance vs. Game Boy Color 

Game Boy Advance 				Game Boy Color 
CPU 
32-Bit ARM with embedded memory 		8-bit Z80 
Screen 
2.9" TFT reflective screen			2.3" TFT reflective screen
240x160 resolution 				160x140 resolution 
65,535 possible colors 				32,000 possible colors
511 simultaneous colors in character mode; 	56 simultaneous colors  
32,768 simultaneous colors in bitmap mode  
Size (mm) 
135w x 80h x 25d 				75w x 133h x 27d 
Weight 
140g 						138g 
Power 
2 AA batteries 					2 AA batteries 
Battery Life 
20 hours 					10 hours 
Software 
Cartridge format				Cartridge format
GB Color compatible				Game Boy compatible  
Game Boy compatible  


How large will the game screen be?

The Game Boy Advance system will also be unique in the sense that the 
LCD screen will be in a widescreen format.


Will the screen be backlit?

No, the LCD screen will be very similar to what's already in the Game 
Boy Color, a reflective TFT screen provided by Sharp Electronics.

There are many reasons why Nintendo is not going with backlighting --

Battery life. Adding a light will drain battery power and require 
more batteries. The Atari Lynx and Game Gear both required six AA 
batteries, and the systems drained a new set in only three hours. The 
Game Boy Advance will remain power economical by only requiring two 
AA batteries that last 20 hours. The only thing needed is an external 
light source. 
Cost. A light costs more money, both in R&D and in material. By going 
with the reflective LCD, it makes the system cost less to manufacture 
and, ultimately, to buy. 
Durability. A light could potentially burn out on the system, 
rendering the Game Boy Advance useless. One hard bump and that's the 
end of the picture.


How many buttons will the system have?
As confirmed on the Game Boy Advance development kit shown to us by 
developer sources, the Game Boy Advance will have an 8-way digital 
pad, two action buttons (A and B), two shoulder buttons (L and R), 
and a start and select button. In total, a D-pad and six buttons, four 
of which will be used for normal action.


What will the system be able to do? What will games look like?

Developers have compared the Game Boy Advance system capabilities to 
that of the Nintendo Super NES system. The Game Boy Advance will be 
able to have transparency effects, scaling and rotating effects (like 
Mode 7 on the Super NES). The sound chip will be able to handle both 
stereo and Dolby Surround effects through the headphone jack.


Will the Game Boy Advance be capable of 3D graphics?

The nature of the system's 32-bit architecture means the system will 
have at least rudimentary 3D capabilities - texture-mapped 3D polygons. 
How many the system can display and at what framerate remains to be 
seen. Developers have debated this capability in the Game Boy Advance, 
but most agree that the system can at least do something similar to 
Starfox on the Super Nintendo.


Will the system be able to play Game Boy and Game Boy Color games?

Yes. The Game Boy Advance will be 100% compatible with the older Game 
Boy and Game Boy Color games. Since the GBA screen will have more 
pixels, the image for the older games will have to be bordered in 
order to fit on-screen.


What games are being made for the Game Boy Advance?

With Konami heavily involved in the development of software tools for 
the system, it's a good bet that at least this company has its hands 
in game development for Game Boy Advance. Many Game Boy Color 
developers have expressed great interest in starting development on 
the Game Boy Advance. The development kits are now available to 
official Nintendo third party developers.

More than 60 US and European developers have signed on and received 
Game Boy Advance development kits. Companies like Crawfish, Digital 
Eclipse, Camelot, Handheld Games, Rare, and Classified Games are all 
working on games for the system.

In August we will know what's currently in the works. Right now we 
know of a few GBA games in development:

Vigilante 8: Second Offense 
Star Trek: Invasion 
Magical Vacation (Japanese RPG)

And Nintendo has been rumored to have a Kart racing game, a Mario game, 
a shooter, and an adventure game in development in-house. What these 
games will be we'll just have to wait until August.
One of the games being shown in demo form is Yoshi's Story, a port of 
the N64 game. While it hasn't been announced as an official product, 
Yoshi's Story has a good chance of being one of the first GBA games to 
market.


How do you know so much about the Game Boy Advance if Nintendo hasn't 
announced specifics yet?

On April 10, 2000, Nintendo held the Game Boy Advance Game Developers 
Conference 2000, a forum for developers to learn about the system 
before the companies get their development kits. Even though it wasn't 
open to anyone but official third party companies, we got the scoop 
straight from the people who attended the show.


What kind of media will the Game Boy Advance use for its games?

The unit will utilize cartridges like the Game Boy Color. The system 
is much too small to utilize a CD drive, and the unit would be much 
to expensive if it included a Mini-Disc reader. Cartridges can be 
relatively any size (just look at the N64 -- cartridges range from 
8 megabytes to 64 megabytes), and they're very durable and portable. 
Cost is always an issue -- but it's a given that Nintendo would want 
to keep the games as comparable in price to the past Game Boy systems, 
from 20-40 dollars apiece. Plus, the system needs to be backward 
compatible, so the cartridge slot will be exactly the same shape and 
size as the Game Boy Color.

How long will batteries last on the Game Boy Advance?

Nintendo has claimed that the system will last around 20 hours on two 
AA batteries - the same length of time and battery power of the 
current Game Boy Color system. 


What type of peripherals will be available for the Game Boy Advance?

Nintendo plans on releasing a Game Boy Camera-style peripheral for the 
Game Boy Advance, a full-color device that will integrate with the 
system's internet capabilities. With the Game Boy Camera in place, 
gamers will be able to see you as you play multiplayer games, for 
example. Other peripherals include an Infra-red link since the 
Game Boy Advance will not have an IR port built-in. There is also a 
generic rumble cartridge and color printer planned.


How will the Game Boy Advance integrate with Nintendo's next console?

Details are sketchy, but if the current Game Boy Color/64DD plans are 
any indication, the Game Boy Advance will integrate with the Dolphin 
directly. Most likely games will use the system as an external 
controller with screen, where each player has his or her own hidden 
view of certain parts of the game. The unit will have the ability, 
with a specific cable, to plug into the game systems from the GBA's 
link port to the systems' controller ports.

In a horse racing game, for example, you can make bets on the Game 
Boy Advance without your opponents seeing what you're up to and then 
watch the action on the television screen. Or, in a first-person 
shooter, the Game Boy Advance could be used as a map or radar without 
having to clutter up the screen.


How will the Game Boy Advance integrate with the Internet?

When the Game Boy Advance was first announced back in September 1999, 
Nintendo Co. LTD (Nintendo's Japan branch) brought to light the fact 
that cell-phone connectivity would be a major focus for the new 
system. By hooking a cellular phone up to the Game Boy Advance, you'll 
be able to download game software, participate in multiplayer games, 
enter chat rooms, and read e-mail, all on your Game Boy Advance 
system. Specifics about which phones will be required (digital/analog) 
have not been revealed yet, nor have pricing plans, service 
agreements, etc.

However, Nintendo of America doesn't seem interested in bringing this 
feature over to the US, as evident at the lack of details given to 
developers. Game developers have the development kits in-hand, and 
there is no documentation regarding any Internet support. It might be 
in the works for the future, but right now the main focus for the 
Game Boy Advance is games. 


Who is involved with the development of the Game Boy Advance?

ARM Corporation is the company responsible for the 32-bit RISC CPU 
in the Game Boy Advance. ARM Corporation is a UK-based company 
responsible for CPUs used in cellular phones. Konami has also entered 
a joint agreement with Nintendo, and will create a company called 
Mobile 21. This studio will be responsible for the software that will 
interface with the 128-bit Dolphin system. Other companies involved 
have not been announced yet.


Why did Nintendo release the Game Boy Color if the Game Boy Advance 
was so close behind?

It's difficult to say that the Game Boy Color was a stop-gap solution 
between the Game Boy and Game Boy Advance. Obviously one issue was 
giving gamers what they wanted, when the company could. During the 
development of the Game Boy Advance (code name: Atlantis two years 
ago) the cost to bring something like that out at that point in time 
would be too expensive for the market to accept. The Game Boy Color, 
on the other hand, was a more advanced system, offered color and 
specific features, as well as backward compatibility for nearly the 
same price as the existing Game Boy Pocket. Obviously the company 
wanted to release a product that would be widely accepted, supported, 
and purchased.

Also, Nintendo wanted to release a new system that would integrate 
better with its next console unit, the Dolphin. Instead of trying to 
shoe-horn the Game Boy Color into interfacing with the Dolphin, 
Nintendo instead integrated a handheld from scratch to work with the 
128-bit console.

When the Game Boy Advance is released next year, don't expect the 
Game Boy Color to fade away. The Game Boy Color and Game Boy Advance 
will co-exist for a while, until finally software development moves 
from one platform to the other. It will be a gradual process, one 
that may take a year or more to complete.

 